    The Gift of the Magi
    
    by O. Henry
    
    
    One dollar and eighty-seven cents. That was all. And sixty cents of it
    was in pennies. Pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the
    grocer and the vegetable man and the butcher until one’s cheeks burned
    with the silent imputation of parsimony that such close dealing
    implied. Three times Della counted it. One dollar and eighty-seven
    cents. And the next day would be Christmas.
    
    There was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little
    couch and howl. So Della did it. Which instigates the moral reflection
    that life is made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles
    predominating.
    
    While the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first
    stage to the second, take a look at the home. A furnished flat at $8
    per week. It did not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had
    that word on the lookout for the mendicancy squad.
    
    In the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go,
    and an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring.
    Also appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name “Mr. James
    Dillingham Young.”
    
    The “Dillingham” had been flung to the breeze during a former period of
    prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. Now, when
    the income was shrunk to $20, though, they were thinking seriously of
    contracting to a modest and unassuming D. But whenever Mr. James
    Dillingham Young came home and reached his flat above he was called
    “Jim” and greatly hugged by Mrs. James Dillingham Young, already
    introduced to you as Della. Which is all very good.
    
    Della finished her cry and attended to her cheeks with the powder rag.
    She stood by the window and looked out dully at a gray cat walking a
    gray fence in a gray backyard. Tomorrow would be Christmas Day, and she
    had only $1.87 with which to buy Jim a present. She had been saving
    every penny she could for months, with this result. Twenty dollars a
    week doesn’t go far. Expenses had been greater than she had calculated.
    They always are. Only $1.87 to buy a present for Jim. Her Jim. Many a
    happy hour she had spent planning for something nice for him. Something
    fine and rare and sterling—something just a little bit near to being
    worthy of the honor of being owned by Jim.
    
    There was a pier glass between the windows of the room. Perhaps you
    have seen a pier glass in an $8 flat. A very thin and very agile person
    may, by observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal
    strips, obtain a fairly accurate conception of his looks. Della, being
    slender, had mastered the art.
    
    Suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. Her
    eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its color within
    twenty seconds. Rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its
    full length.
    
    Now, there were two possessions of the James Dillingham Youngs in which
    they both took a mighty pride. One was Jim’s gold watch that had been
    his father’s and his grandfather’s. The other was Della’s hair. Had the
    queen of Sheba lived in the flat across the airshaft, Della would have
    let her hair hang out the window some day to dry just to depreciate Her
    Majesty’s jewels and gifts. Had King Solomon been the janitor, with all
    his treasures piled up in the basement, Jim would have pulled out his
    watch every time he passed, just to see him pluck at his beard from
    envy.
    
    So now Della’s beautiful hair fell about her rippling and shining like
    a cascade of brown waters. It reached below her knee and made itself
    almost a garment for her. And then she did it up again nervously and
    quickly. Once she faltered for a minute and stood still while a tear or
    two splashed on the worn red carpet.
    
    On went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. With a whirl
    of skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she
    fluttered out the door and down the stairs to the street.
    
    Where she stopped the sign read: “Mme. Sofronie. Hair Goods of All
    Kinds.” One flight up Della ran, and collected herself, panting.
    Madame, large, too white, chilly, hardly looked the “Sofronie.”
    
    “Will you buy my hair?” asked Della.
    
    “I buy hair,” said Madame. “Take yer hat off and let’s have a sight at
    the looks of it.”
    
    Down rippled the brown cascade.
    
    “Twenty dollars,” said Madame, lifting the mass with a practised hand.
    
    “Give it to me quick,” said Della.
    
    Oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. Forget the hashed
    metaphor. She was ransacking the stores for Jim’s present.
    
    She found it at last. It surely had been made for Jim and no one else.
    There was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all
    of them inside out. It was a platinum fob chain simple and chaste in
    design, properly proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by
    meretricious ornamentation—as all good things should do. It was even
    worthy of The Watch. As soon as she saw it she knew that it must be
    Jim’s. It was like him. Quietness and value—the description applied to
    both. Twenty-one dollars they took from her for it, and she hurried
    home with the 87 cents. With that chain on his watch Jim might be
    properly anxious about the time in any company. Grand as the watch was,
    he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the old leather
    strap that he used in place of a chain.
    
    When Della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence
    and reason. She got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went
    to work repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. Which
    is always a tremendous task, dear friends—a mammoth task.
    
    Within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny, close-lying curls
    that made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. She looked at
    her reflection in the mirror long, carefully, and critically.
    
    “If Jim doesn’t kill me,” she said to herself, “before he takes a
    second look at me, he’ll say I look like a Coney Island chorus girl.
    But what could I do—oh! what could I do with a dollar and eighty-seven
    cents?”
    
    At 7 o’clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back of
    the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.
    
    Jim was never late. Della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on
    the corner of the table near the door that he always entered. Then she
    heard his step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she
    turned white for just a moment. She had a habit of saying a little
    silent prayer about the simplest everyday things, and now she
    whispered: “Please God, make him think I am still pretty.”
    
    The door opened and Jim stepped in and closed it. He looked thin and
    very serious. Poor fellow, he was only twenty-two—and to be burdened
    with a family! He needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.
    
    Jim stopped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of
    quail. His eyes were fixed upon Della, and there was an expression in
    them that she could not read, and it terrified her. It was not anger,
    nor surprise, nor disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments
    that she had been prepared for. He simply stared at her fixedly with
    that peculiar expression on his face.
    
    Della wriggled off the table and went for him.
    
    “Jim, darling,” she cried, “don’t look at me that way. I had my hair
    cut off and sold because I couldn’t have lived through Christmas
    without giving you a present. It’ll grow out again—you won’t mind, will
 